.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Daniel Lovasko.
.\" All Rights Reserved
.\"
.\" Distributed under the terms of the 2-clause BSD License. The full
.\" license is in the file LICENSE, distributed as part of this software.
.Dd Jul 13, 2018
.Dt NEMO 8
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm nreq
.Nd unicast heartbeat requester
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 4
.Op Fl 6
.Op Fl c Ar cnt
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl i Ar dur
.Op Fl k Ar key
.Op Fl m
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl p Ar num
.Op Fl r Ar rbs
.Op Fl s Ar sbs
.Op Fl t Ar ttl
.Op Fl v
target
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility periodically issues UDP datagram requests to a set of network targets,
while also awaiting and reporting on replies from a responder process. It can
be used in conjunction with the
.Xr nres 8
utility to test, debug and verify network configurations.
.Sh OPTIONS
The utility accepts the following command-line options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl 4
The network communication will only use the IP version 4. This option is
mutually exclusive with
.Fl 6 .
.
.It Fl 6
The network communication will only use the IP version 6. This option is
mutually exclusive with
.Fl 4 .
.
.It Fl c Ar cnt
Sets the number of requests the program will issue. The default value is
.Em 60 .
.
.It Fl d
Run the process as a daemon. All standard streams will be closed and the
logging output will use the syslog(3) framework.
.
.It Fl e
The process will terminate when the first network-related error is encountered.
If not specified, the process will only print the relevant error message.
.
.It Fl h
Prints the usage message.
.
.It Fl i Ar dur
Sets the duration between each round of issued payloads (see DURATION FORMAT).
The default value is
.Em 1s .
.
.It Fl k Ar key
Sets the key of each outgoing nemo payload (see FLOW IDENTIFICATION). If not
specified, a random value is generated.
.
.It Fl m
Turns on the monologue mode where no responses over the network are expected.
Therefore, no action sets that fire when a response is received get executed.
.
.It Fl n
Disables the usage of colors in the logging output (see LOGGING).
.
.It Fl p Ar num
Specify the UDP port of all created endpoints. The default value is
.Em 23000 .
.
.It Fl r Ar rbs
Sets the socket receive memory buffer to the specified size (see MEMORY SIZE
FORMAT).  The default value is
.Em 2mb .
.
.It Fl s Ar sbs
Sets the socket send memory buffer to the specified size (see MEMORY SIZE
FORMAT).  The default value is
.Em 2mb .
.
.It Fl t Ar ttl
Sets the Time-To-Live property of each outgoing datagram.  If not specified,
the value defaults to
. Em 64 .
.
.It Fl v
Enables more verbose logging. Repeating this flag will turn on more detailed
levels of logging messages (see LOGGING).
.El
.
.Sh FLOW IDENTIFICATION
In order to support multiple simultaneous runs of the tool, the publisher can
stamp the payload with a key - a 64-bit unsigned integer - that identifies the
set of outgoing packets. Similarly the subscriber utility is able to filter out
everything but a given key.
.
.Sh MEMORY SIZE FORMAT
The memory size has to be specified by an unsigned integer, followed by a
memory unit. An example of a valid memory size is
.Em 1KB .
Supported units are:
.Em B ,
.Em KB ,
.Em K ,
.Em MB ,
.Em M ,
.Em GB ,
.Em G .
All units are accepted case-insensitive. Zero memory size is allowed, e.g.
.Em 0B .
.
.Sh DURATION FORMAT
The time duration has to be specified by an unsigned integer, followed by a
time unit. An example of a valid duration is
.Em 1s .
Supported units are:
.Em ns ,
.Em us ,
.Em ms ,
.Em s ,
.Em m ,
.Em h ,
.Em d .
Zero duration is allowed, e.g.
.Em 0ms .
.
.Sh PAYLOAD FORMAT
The format of the payload is binary. All numeric fields are unsigned
integers in network byte order, while the 64-bit unsigned integers are split
into high and low 32-bits, with both parts encoded in the network byte order.
The total payload size is
.Em 96 
bytes. All valid payloads must start with a magic number
.Em 0x6e656d6f 
in network byte order, which is the equivalent of four ASCII letters
.Qq nemo .
The current format version is
.Em 1 .
Each payload contains the following fields in order:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent 
.It
magic identifiers (4 bytes)
.It
format version number (1 byte)
.It
message type (1 byte)
.It
UDP port number (2 bytes)
.It
TTL value when sent from requester (1 byte)
.It
TTL value when received by responder (1 byte)
.It
TTL value when sent from responder (1 byte)
.It
padding - unused (5 bytes)
.It
sequence iteration counter (8 bytes)
.It
sequence length (8 bytes)
.It
IP address - low bits (8 bytes)
.It
IP address - high bits (8 bytes)
.It
requester key (8 bytes)
.It
responder key (8 bytes)
.It
time of departure from requester, nanoseconds system time (8 bytes)
.It
time of departure from requester, nanoseconds steady time (8 bytes)
.It
time of departure from responder, nanoseconds system time (8 bytes)
.It
time of departure from responder, nanoseconds steady time (8 bytes)
.El
.
.Sh LOGGING
The program outputs logging information to the standard error stream. Each log
line contains 4 parts: time, severity, textual description, and an optional
error description, obtained based on the
.Em errno
mechanism. There are 4 severity levels, abbreviated and color-coded: 
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ERROR
Emitted exactly one per failed process execution, denoting the high-level
reason for the failure. The color is red.
.It WARN
Emitted each time a task did not succeed, with a detailed description of the
situation. The color is yellow.
.It INFO
Consists mainly of general high-level view to what task the process is
performing. The color is green.
.It DEBUG
Contains detailed information about the variable values and sub-tasks. The
color is blue.
.El
.
.Sh EXIT CODE 
The process returns
.Em 0
on success,
. Em 1
on failure.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Daniel Lovasko Aq Mt daniel.lovasko@gmail.com
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nres 8 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr send 2 ,
.Xr recv 2 ,
.Xr select 2
